# Creating a Character

## Ability Scores

Ability scores are numeric representations of your character's core strengths and are essential to play the game. An array of ability scores can be generated by rolling `2d4▲-1d4` six times, or you can use this standard array: `+2, +2, +1, +1, ±0, -1`. Once you have six numbers, assign each one to one of the six ability scores in any order.

## Race

## Origin

## Other Details

### Hit Points

### Mana

Mana represents the energy and fighting spirit of a character. Mana can be used to cast magic spells or execute daring martial feats. Mana is mainly determined by level, but is influenced by one's [Presence](../ability-scores-and-skills.md#presence) ability score.

#### Breaking Up Mana

Two mana of equal level can be exchanged for three mana of one level lower.

#### Mana from Presence

A character's [Presence](../ability-scores-and-skills.md#presence) ability score also determines an additional amount of mana that is either gained or lost. A character gains or loses mana equal to their [Presence](../ability-scores-and-skills.md#presence) score of a level determined by the table below:

| Character Level | Mana Level |
| :--- | :--- |
| 1–5 | 1 |
| 6–10 | 2 |
| 11–15 | 3 |
| 16–20 | 4 |

If a character loses mana due to a negative [Presence](../ability-scores-and-skills.md#presence) score, their mana will need to be [broken up](creating-a-character.md#breaking-up-mana) in order to subtract the proper amount of mana.

#### Using Hit Points in place of Mana

When casting a spell or executing a technique, you can take damage instead of using mana. To do this, you take an amount of `🧠` damage equal to 10 times the level of mana you are substituting for. If you are reduced to 0 hit points in this way, you die.

### Training

Training are points that represent the practice and experience you have with either magic or fighting. You have Training equal to three times your level.

Each technique counts 1 towards your Training, and each spell you know counts towards your Training, depending on the spell's [class](../magic/rules-of-magic.md#spell-class): 1 for natural magic, 2 for synthetic magic, 3 for persistent magic, and 4 for true magic.

You may learn new spells and techniques as long as you do not exceed your Training.

You also have a separate Training specifically for Tricks and Simple Techniques equal to twice your level.

## Beyond 1st Level

| Level | XP Threshold | Features | Mana | Mana Level |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | 0 |  | 2 | 2 |
| 2 | 300 |  | 3 | 2 |
| 3 | 1,490 | Ability Score Increase | 2 | 3 |
| 4 | 3,800 |  | 3 | 3 |
| 5 | 6,400 |  | 2 | 4 |
| 6 | 7,390 | Ability Score Increase | 3 | 4 |
| 7 | 12,380 |  | 2 | 5 |
| 8 | 26,950 | Ability Score Increase | 3 | 5 |
| 9 | 36,690 |  | 2 | 6 |
| 10 | 48,170 |  | 3 | 6 |
| 11 | 61,450 | Ability Score Increase | 4 | 6 |
| 12 | 76,600 |  | 2 | 7 |
| 13 | 93,670 | Ability Score Increase | 3 | 7 |
| 14 | 112,700 |  | 4 | 7 |
| 15 | 133,770 |  | 2 | 8 |
| 16 | 156,890 | Ability Score Increase | 3 | 8 |
| 17 | 182,130 |  | 4 | 8 |
| 18 | 209,530 | Ability Score Increase | 2 | 9 |
| 19 | 239,130 |  | 3 | 9 |
| 20 | 270,960 |  | 4 | 9 |

### Perk

You gain one [perk](perks.md) of your choice, provided you meet all prerequisites.

### Ability Score Increase

One [ability score](../ability-scores-and-skills.md) of your choice increases by 1.

